The Tempest
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/the-tempest/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
PROSPERO, the former duke of Milan, now a magician on a Mediterranean island
MIRANDA, Prospero's daughter
ARIEL, a spirit, servant to Prospero
CALIBAN, an inhabitant of the island, servant to Prospero
FERDINAND, prince of Naples
ALONSO, king of Naples
ANTONIO, duke of Milan and Prospero's brother
SEBASTIAN, Alonso's brother
GONZALO, councillor to Alonso and friend to Prospero
Courtiers in attendance on Alonso:
  ADRIAN
  FRANCISCO
TRINCULO, servant to Alonso
STEPHANO, Alonso's butler
SHIPMASTER
BOATSWAIN
MARINERS
Players who, as spirits, take the roles of Iris, Ceres, Juno, Nymphs, and Reapers in Prospero's masque, and who, in other scenes, take the roles of "islanders" and of hunting dogs


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[A tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard.
Enter a Shipmaster and a Boatswain.]


MASTER  Boatswain!

BOATSWAIN  Here, master. What cheer?

MASTER  Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to 't yarely,
or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir!
[He exits.]

[Enter Mariners.]


BOATSWAIN  Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my
hearts! Yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th'
Master's whistle.--Blow till thou burst thy wind, if
room enough!

[Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, Ferdinand, Gonzalo,
and others.]


ALONSO  Good boatswain, have care. Where's the Master?
Play the men.

BOATSWAIN  I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO  Where is the Master, boatswain?

BOATSWAIN  Do you not hear him? You mar our labor.
Keep your cabins. You do assist the storm.

GONZALO  Nay, good, be patient.

BOATSWAIN  When the sea is. Hence! What cares these
roarers for the name of king? To cabin! Silence!
Trouble us not.

GONZALO  Good, yet remember whom thou hast
aboard.

BOATSWAIN  None that I more love than myself. You are
a councillor; if you can command these elements
to silence, and work the peace of the present, we
will not hand a rope more. Use your authority. If
you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and
make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance
of the hour, if it so hap.--Cheerly, good
hearts!--Out of our way, I say!	[He exits.]

GONZALO  I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks
he hath no drowning mark upon him. His
complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good
Fate, to his hanging. Make the rope of his destiny
our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be
not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
[He exits with Alonso, Sebastian,
and the other courtiers.]

[Enter Boatswain.]


BOATSWAIN  Down with the topmast! Yare! Lower, lower!
Bring her to try wi' th' main course. [(A cry
within.)] A plague upon this howling! They are
louder than the weather or our office.

[Enter Sebastian, Antonio, and Gonzalo.]

Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and
drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN  A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous,
incharitable dog!

BOATSWAIN  Work you, then.

ANTONIO  Hang, cur, hang, you whoreson, insolent
noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than
thou art.

GONZALO  I'll warrant him for drowning, though the
ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky
as an unstanched wench.

BOATSWAIN  Lay her ahold, ahold! Set her two courses.
Off to sea again! Lay her off!

[Enter more Mariners, wet.]


MARINERS  All lost! To prayers, to prayers! All lost!
[Mariners exit.]

BOATSWAIN  What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO  The King and Prince at prayers. Let's assist
them, for our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN  I am out of patience.

ANTONIO  We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards.
This wide-chopped rascal--would thou
mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
[Boatswain exits.]

GONZALO  He'll be hanged yet, though every drop of
water swear against it and gape at wid'st to glut him.


[A confused noise within:]  "Mercy on us!"--"We split, we
split!"--"Farewell, my wife and children!"--
"Farewell, brother!"--"We split, we split, we
split!"


ANTONIO  Let's all sink wi' th' King.

SEBASTIAN  Let's take leave of him.
[He exits with Antonio.]

GONZALO  Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea
for an acre of barren ground: long heath, brown
furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I
would fain die a dry death.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Prospero and Miranda.]


MIRANDA
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer! A brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dashed all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perished.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
It should the good ship so have swallowed, and
The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO  Be collected.
No more amazement. Tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done.

MIRANDA  O, woe the day!

PROSPERO  No harm.
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA  More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO  'Tis time
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand
And pluck my magic garment from me.
[Putting aside his cloak.]
So,
Lie there, my art.--Wipe thou thine eyes. Have
comfort.
The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
No, not so much perdition as an hair,
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit
down,
For thou must now know farther.	[They sit.]

MIRANDA  You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopped
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding "Stay. Not yet."

PROSPERO  The hour's now come.
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.
Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell?
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Out three years old.

MIRANDA  Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO
By what? By any other house or person?
Of anything the image tell me that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA  'Tis far off
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou rememb'rest aught ere thou cam'st here,
How thou cam'st here thou mayst.

MIRANDA  But that I do not.

PROSPERO
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
A prince of power.

MIRANDA  Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter. And thy father
Was Duke of Milan, and his only heir
And princess no worse issued.

MIRANDA  O, the heavens!
What foul play had we that we came from thence?
Or blessed was 't we did?

PROSPERO  Both, both, my girl.
By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence,
But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA  O, my heart bleeds
To think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,
Which is from my remembrance. Please you,
farther.

PROSPERO
My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio--
I pray thee, mark me--that a brother should
Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
Of all the world I loved, and to him put
The manage of my state, as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first,
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Without a parallel. Those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA  Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who t' advance, and who
To trash for overtopping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new formed 'em, having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state
To what tune pleased his ear, that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk
And sucked my verdure out on 't. Thou attend'st not.

MIRANDA
O, good sir, I do.

PROSPERO  I pray thee, mark me.
I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retired,
O'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother
Awaked an evil nature, and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in its contrary as great
As my trust was, which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who, having into truth by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the Duke, out o' th' substitution
And executing th' outward face of royalty
With all prerogative. Hence, his ambition growing--
Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO
To have no screen between this part he played
And him he played it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough. Of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates,
So dry he was for sway, wi' th' King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown, and bend
The dukedom, yet unbowed--alas, poor Milan!--
To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA  O, the heavens!

PROSPERO
Mark his condition and th' event. Then tell me
If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA  I should sin
To think but nobly of my grandmother.
Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO  Now the condition.
This King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit,
Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan,
With all the honors, on my brother; whereon,
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open
The gates of Milan, and i' th' dead of darkness
The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA  Alack, for pity!
I, not rememb'ring how I cried out then,
Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to 't.

PROSPERO  Hear a little further,
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now 's upon 's, without the which this story
Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA  Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO  Well demanded, wench.
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
A mark so bloody on the business, but
With colors fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively have quit it. There they hoist us
To cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh
To th' winds, whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA  Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you!

PROSPERO  O, a cherubin
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile,
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have decked the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burden groaned, which raised in me
An undergoing stomach to bear up
Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA  How came we ashore?

PROSPERO  By providence divine.
Some food we had, and some fresh water, that
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity, who being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much. So, of his
gentleness,
Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me
From mine own library with volumes that
I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA  Would I might
But ever see that man.

PROSPERO, [standing]  Now I arise.
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrived, and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princes can, that have more time
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA
Heavens thank you for 't. And now I pray you, sir--
For still 'tis beating in my mind--your reason
For raising this sea storm?

PROSPERO  Know thus far forth:
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions.
Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness,
And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.
[Miranda falls asleep.]
[Prospero puts on his cloak.]
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel. Come.

[Enter Ariel.]


ARIEL
All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure. Be 't to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curled clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO  Hast thou, spirit,
Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL  To every article.
I boarded the King's ship; now on the beak,
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamed amazement. Sometimes I'd divide
And burn in many places. On the topmast,
The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Jove's lightning, the precursors
O' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary
And sight-outrunning were not. The fire and cracks
Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO  My brave spirit!
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL  Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad, and played
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me. The King's son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring--then like reeds, not hair--
Was the first man that leaped; cried "Hell is empty,
And all the devils are here."

PROSPERO  Why, that's my spirit!
But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL  Close by, my master.

PROSPERO
But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL  Not a hair perished.
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before; and, as thou bad'st me,
In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
The King's son have I landed by himself,
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.	[He folds his arms.]

PROSPERO  Of the King's ship,
The mariners say how thou hast disposed,
And all the rest o' th' fleet.

ARIEL  Safely in harbor
Is the King's ship. In the deep nook, where once
Thou called'st me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there she's hid;
The mariners all under hatches stowed,
Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor,
I have left asleep. And for the rest o' th' fleet,
Which I dispersed, they all have met again
And are upon the Mediterranean float,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the King's ship wracked
And his great person perish.

PROSPERO  Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is performed. But there's more work.
What is the time o' th' day?

ARIEL  Past the mid season.

PROSPERO
At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet performed me.

PROSPERO  How now? Moody?
What is 't thou canst demand?

ARIEL  My liberty.

PROSPERO
Before the time be out? No more.

ARIEL  I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service,
Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, served
Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou did promise
To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO  Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL  No.

PROSPERO
Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the North,
To do me business in the veins o' th' Earth
When it is baked with frost.

ARIEL  I do not, sir.

PROSPERO
Thou liest, malignant thing. Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL  No, sir.

PROSPERO
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.

ARIEL
Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO  O, was she so? I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forget'st. This damned witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou know'st, was banished. For one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL  Ay, sir.

PROSPERO
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thyself, was then her servant,
And for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorred commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine, within which rift
Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain
A dozen years; within which space she died
And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island
(Save for the son that she did litter here,
A freckled whelp, hag-born) not honored with
A human shape.

ARIEL  Yes, Caliban, her son.

PROSPERO
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
What torment I did find thee in. Thy groans
Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
Of ever-angry bears. It was a torment
To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax
Could not again undo. It was mine art,
When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
The pine and let thee out.

ARIEL  I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO
If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howled away twelve winters.

ARIEL  Pardon, master.
I will be correspondent to command
And do my spriting gently.

PROSPERO  Do so, and after two days
I will discharge thee.

ARIEL  That's my noble master.
What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?

PROSPERO
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. Be subject
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
To every eyeball else. Go, take this shape,
And hither come in 't. Go, hence with diligence!
[Ariel exits.]
Awake, dear heart, awake. Thou hast slept well.
Awake.	[Miranda wakes.]

MIRANDA  The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO  Shake it off. Come on,
We'll visit Caliban, my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA, [rising]  'Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO  But, as 'tis,
We cannot miss him. He does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices
That profit us.--What ho, slave, Caliban!
Thou earth, thou, speak!

CALIBAN, [within]  There's wood enough within.

PROSPERO
Come forth, I say. There's other business for thee.
Come, thou tortoise. When?

[Enter Ariel like a water nymph.]

Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.	[He whispers to Ariel.]

ARIEL  My lord, it shall be done.	[He exits.]

PROSPERO, [to Caliban]
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

[Enter Caliban.]


CALIBAN
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both. A southwest blow on you
And blister you all o'er.

PROSPERO
For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins
Shall forth at vast of night that they may work
All exercise on thee. Thou shalt be pinched
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made 'em.

CALIBAN  I must eat my dinner.
This island's mine by Sycorax, my mother,
Which thou tak'st from me. When thou cam'st first,
Thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst
give me
Water with berries in 't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light and how the less,
That burn by day and night. And then I loved thee,
And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and
fertile.
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you,
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king; and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' th' island.

PROSPERO  Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness, I have used
thee,
Filth as thou art, with humane care, and lodged
thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honor of my child.

CALIBAN
O ho, O ho! Would 't had been done!
Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.

MIRANDA  Abhorred slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each
hour
One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes
With words that made them known. But thy vile
race,
Though thou didst learn, had that in 't which good
natures
Could not abide to be with. Therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this rock,
Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

CALIBAN
You taught me language, and my profit on 't
Is I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!

PROSPERO  Hagseed, hence!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou 'rt best,
To answer other business. Shrugg'st thou, malice?
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN  No, pray thee.
[Aside.] I must obey. His art is of such power
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO  So, slave, hence.
[Caliban exits.]

[Enter Ferdinand; and Ariel, invisible,
playing and singing.]

Song.

ARIEL
	Come unto these yellow sands,
	   And then take hands.
	Curtsied when you have, and kissed
	   The wild waves whist.
	Foot it featly here and there,
	   And sweet sprites bear
	The burden. Hark, hark!
	      [Burden dispersedly, within:] Bow-wow.
	   The watchdogs bark.
	      [Burden dispersedly, within:] Bow-wow.
	Hark, hark! I hear
	The strain of strutting chanticleer
	   Cry cock-a-diddle-dow.

FERDINAND
Where should this music be? I' th' air, or th' earth?
It sounds no more; and sure it waits upon
Some god o' th' island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the King my father's wrack,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.

Song.

ARIEL
	Full fathom five thy father lies.
	   Of his bones are coral made.
	Those are pearls that were his eyes.
	   Nothing of him that doth fade
	But doth suffer a sea change
	Into something rich and strange.
	Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell.
		[Burden, within:] Ding dong.
	Hark, now I hear them: ding dong bell.

FERDINAND
The ditty does remember my drowned father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the Earth owes. I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO, [to Miranda]
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA  What is 't? A spirit?
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.

PROSPERO
No, wench, it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wrack; and, but he's something stained
With grief--that's beauty's canker--thou might'st
call him
A goodly person. He hath lost his fellows
And strays about to find 'em.

MIRANDA  I might call him
A thing divine, for nothing natural
I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO, [aside]  It goes on, I see,
As my soul prompts it. [To Ariel.] Spirit, fine spirit,
I'll free thee
Within two days for this.

FERDINAND, [seeing Miranda]  Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend!--Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island,
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here. My prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is--O you wonder!--
If you be maid or no.

MIRANDA  No wonder, sir,
But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND  My language! Heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.

PROSPERO  How? The best?
What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me,
And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The King my father wracked.

MIRANDA  Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO, [aside]  The Duke of Milan
And his more braver daughter could control thee,
If now 'twere fit to do 't. At the first sight
They have changed eyes.--Delicate Ariel,
I'll set thee free for this. [To Ferdinand.] A word,
good sir.
I fear you have done yourself some wrong. A word.

MIRANDA
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
That e'er I sighed for. Pity move my father
To be inclined my way.

FERDINAND  O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The Queen of Naples.

PROSPERO  Soft, sir, one word more.
[Aside.] They are both in either's powers. But this
swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light. [To Ferdinand.] One word
more. I charge thee
That thou attend me. Thou dost here usurp
The name thou ow'st not, and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on 't.

FERDINAND  No, as I am a man!

MIRANDA
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with 't.

PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]  Follow me.
[To Miranda.] Speak not you for him. He's a traitor.
[To Ferdinand.] Come,
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together.
Sea water shalt thou drink. Thy food shall be
The fresh-brook mussels, withered roots, and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND  No,
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.
[He draws, and is charmed from moving.]

MIRANDA  O dear father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
He's gentle and not fearful.

PROSPERO  What, I say,
My foot my tutor?--Put thy sword up, traitor,
Who mak'st a show, but dar'st not strike, thy
conscience
Is so possessed with guilt. Come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA  Beseech you, father--

PROSPERO
Hence! Hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA  Sir, have pity.
I'll be his surety.

PROSPERO  Silence! One word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What,
An advocate for an impostor? Hush.
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban. Foolish wench,
To th' most of men this is a Caliban,
And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA  My affections
Are then most humble. I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]  Come on, obey.
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigor in them.

FERDINAND  So they are.
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wrack of all my friends, nor this man's threats
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid. All corners else o' th' Earth
Let liberty make use of. Space enough
Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO, [aside]  It works.--Come on.--
Thou hast done well, fine Ariel.--Follow me.
[To Ariel.] Hark what thou else shalt do me.

MIRANDA, [to Ferdinand]  Be of
comfort.
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech. This is unwonted
Which now came from him.

PROSPERO, [to Ariel]  Thou shalt be as free
As mountain winds; but then exactly do
All points of my command.

ARIEL  To th' syllable.

PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]
Come follow. [To Miranda.] Speak not for him.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, Gonzalo, Adrian,
Francisco, and others.]


GONZALO, [to Alonso]
Beseech you, sir, be merry. You have cause--
So have we all--of joy, for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant, and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe. But for the miracle--
I mean our preservation--few in millions
Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO  Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN, [aside to Antonio]  He receives comfort like
cold porridge.

ANTONIO  The visitor will not give him o'er so.

SEBASTIAN  Look, he's winding up the watch of his wit.
By and by it will strike.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]  Sir--

SEBASTIAN  One. Tell.

GONZALO  When every grief is entertained that's offered,
comes to th' entertainer--

SEBASTIAN  A dollar.

GONZALO  Dolor comes to him indeed. You have spoken
truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN  You have taken it wiselier than I meant you
should.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]  Therefore, my lord--

ANTONIO  Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue.

ALONSO, [to Gonzalo]  I prithee, spare.

GONZALO  Well, I have done. But yet--

SEBASTIAN, [aside to Antonio]  He will be talking.

ANTONIO, [aside to Sebastian]  Which, of he or Adrian,
for a good wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN  The old cock.

ANTONIO  The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN  Done. The wager?

ANTONIO  A laughter.

SEBASTIAN  A match!

ADRIAN  Though this island seem to be desert--

ANTONIO  Ha, ha, ha.

SEBASTIAN  So. You're paid.

ADRIAN  Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible--

SEBASTIAN  Yet--

ADRIAN  Yet--

ANTONIO  He could not miss 't.

ADRIAN  It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate
temperance.

ANTONIO  Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN  Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly
delivered.

ADRIAN  The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN  As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.

ANTONIO  Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

GONZALO  Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO  True, save means to live.

SEBASTIAN  Of that there's none, or little.

GONZALO  How lush and lusty the grass looks! How
green!

ANTONIO  The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN  With an eye of green in 't.

ANTONIO  He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN  No, he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO  But the rarity of it is, which is indeed almost
beyond credit--

SEBASTIAN  As many vouched rarities are.

GONZALO  That our garments, being, as they were,
drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their
freshness and gloss, being rather new-dyed than
stained with salt water.

ANTONIO  If but one of his pockets could speak, would
it not say he lies?

SEBASTIAN  Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.

GONZALO  Methinks our garments are now as fresh as
when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage
of the King's fair daughter Claribel to the King of
Tunis.

SEBASTIAN  'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper
well in our return.

ADRIAN  Tunis was never graced before with such a
paragon to their queen.

GONZALO  Not since widow Dido's time.

ANTONIO  Widow? A pox o' that! How came that "widow"
in? Widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN  What if he had said "widower Aeneas" too?
Good Lord, how you take it!

ADRIAN, [to Gonzalo]  "Widow Dido," said you? You
make me study of that. She was of Carthage, not of
Tunis.

GONZALO  This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN  Carthage?

GONZALO  I assure you, Carthage.

ANTONIO  His word is more than the miraculous harp.

SEBASTIAN  He hath raised the wall, and houses too.

ANTONIO  What impossible matter will he make easy
next?

SEBASTIAN  I think he will carry this island home in his
pocket and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO  And sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.

GONZALO  Ay.

ANTONIO  Why, in good time.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]  Sir, we were talking that our
garments seem now as fresh as when we were at
Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now
queen.

ANTONIO  And the rarest that e'er came there.

SEBASTIAN  Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO  O, widow Dido? Ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]  Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as
the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO  That "sort" was well fished for.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]  When I wore it at your daughter's
marriage.

ALONSO
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there, for coming thence
My son is lost, and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I ne'er again shall see her.--O, thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO  Sir, he may live.
I saw him beat the surges under him
And ride upon their backs. He trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoll'n that met him. His bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed,
As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt
He came alive to land.

ALONSO  No, no, he's gone.

SEBASTIAN
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African,
Where she at least is banished from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on 't.

ALONSO  Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN
You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise
By all of us; and the fair soul herself
Weighed between loathness and obedience at
Which end o' th' beam should bow. We have lost
your son,
I fear, forever. Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them.
The fault's your own.

ALONSO  So is the dear'st o' th' loss.

GONZALO  My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in. You rub the sore
When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN  Very well.

ANTONIO  And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO, [to Alonso]
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN  Foul weather?

ANTONIO  Very foul.

GONZALO
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord--

ANTONIO
He'd sow 't with nettle seed.

SEBASTIAN  Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO
And were the king on 't, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN  Scape being drunk, for want of wine.

GONZALO
I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things, for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all,
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty--

SEBASTIAN  Yet he would be king on 't.

ANTONIO  The latter end of his commonwealth forgets
the beginning.

GONZALO
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavor; treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth
Of its own kind all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN  No marrying 'mong his subjects?

ANTONIO  None, man, all idle: whores and knaves.

GONZALO
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
T' excel the Golden Age.

SEBASTIAN  'Save his Majesty!

ANTONIO
Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO  And do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO
Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO  I do well believe your Highness, and did it to
minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of
such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use
to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO  'Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO  Who in this kind of merry fooling am
nothing to you. So you may continue, and laugh at
nothing still.

ANTONIO  What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN  An it had not fallen flatlong.

GONZALO  You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You
would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would
continue in it five weeks without changing.

[Enter Ariel invisible, playing solemn music.]


SEBASTIAN  We would so, and then go a-batfowling.

ANTONIO, [to Gonzalo]  Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO  No, I warrant you, I will not adventure my
discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep?
For I am very heavy.

ANTONIO  Go sleep, and hear us.
[All sink down asleep except Alonso,
Antonio, and Sebastian.]

ALONSO
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts. I find
They are inclined to do so.

SEBASTIAN  Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it.
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.

ANTONIO  We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.

ALONSO  Thank you. Wondrous heavy.
[Alonso sleeps. Ariel exits.]

SEBASTIAN
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

ANTONIO
It is the quality o' th' climate.

SEBASTIAN  Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find
Not myself disposed to sleep.

ANTONIO  Nor I. My spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent.
They dropped as by a thunderstroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian, O, what might--? No more.
And yet methinks I see it in thy face
What thou shouldst be. Th' occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.

SEBASTIAN  What, art thou waking?

ANTONIO
Do you not hear me speak?

SEBASTIAN  I do, and surely
It is a sleepy language, and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open--standing, speaking, moving--
And yet so fast asleep.

ANTONIO  Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep, die rather, wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.

SEBASTIAN  Thou dost snore distinctly.
There's meaning in thy snores.

ANTONIO
I am more serious than my custom. You
Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
Trebles thee o'er.

SEBASTIAN  Well, I am standing water.

ANTONIO
I'll teach you how to flow.

SEBASTIAN  Do so. To ebb
Hereditary sloth instructs me.

ANTONIO  O,
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it, how in stripping it
You more invest it. Ebbing men indeed
Most often do so near the bottom run
By their own fear or sloth.

SEBASTIAN  Prithee, say on.
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
A matter from thee, and a birth indeed
Which throes thee much to yield.

ANTONIO  Thus, sir:
Although this lord of weak remembrance--this,
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earthed--hath here almost persuaded--
For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade--the King his son's alive,
'Tis as impossible that he's undrowned
As he that sleeps here swims.

SEBASTIAN  I have no hope
That he's undrowned.

ANTONIO  O, out of that no hope
What great hope have you! No hope that way is
Another way so high a hope that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drowned?

SEBASTIAN  He's gone.

ANTONIO  Then tell me,
Who's the next heir of Naples?

SEBASTIAN  Claribel.

ANTONIO
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the sun were post--
The man i' th' moon's too slow--till newborn chins
Be rough and razorable; she that from whom
We all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again,
And by that destiny to perform an act
Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.

SEBASTIAN  What stuff is this? How say you?
'Tis true my brother's daughter's Queen of Tunis,
So is she heir of Naples, 'twixt which regions
There is some space.

ANTONIO  A space whose ev'ry cubit
Seems to cry out "How shall that Claribel
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis
And let Sebastian wake." Say this were death
That now hath seized them, why, they were no worse
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo. I myself could make
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
The mind that I do, what a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me?

SEBASTIAN
Methinks I do.

ANTONIO  And how does your content
Tender your own good fortune?

SEBASTIAN  I remember
You did supplant your brother Prospero.

ANTONIO  True,
And look how well my garments sit upon me,
Much feater than before. My brother's servants
Were then my fellows; now they are my men.

SEBASTIAN  But, for your conscience?

ANTONIO
Ay, sir, where lies that? If 'twere a kibe,
'Twould put me to my slipper, but I feel not
This deity in my bosom. Twenty consciences
That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
No better than the earth he lies upon.
If he were that which now he's like--that's dead--
Whom I with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Can lay to bed forever; whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk.
They'll tell the clock to any business that
We say befits the hour.

SEBASTIAN  Thy case, dear friend,
Shall be my precedent: as thou got'st Milan,
I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword. One stroke
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest,
And I the King shall love thee.

ANTONIO  Draw together,
And when I rear my hand, do you the like
To fall it on Gonzalo.	[They draw their swords.]

SEBASTIAN  O, but one word.
[They talk apart.]

[Enter Ariel, invisible, with music and song.]


ARIEL, [to the sleeping Gonzalo]
My master through his art foresees the danger
That you, his friend, are in, and sends me forth--
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
[Sings in Gonzalo's ear:]
	While you here do snoring lie,
	Open-eyed conspiracy
	   His time doth take.
	If of life you keep a care,
	Shake off slumber and beware.
	   Awake, awake!

ANTONIO, [to Sebastian]  Then let us both be sudden.

GONZALO, [waking]  Now, good angels preserve the
King!	[He wakes Alonso.]

ALONSO, [to Sebastian]
Why, how now, ho! Awake? Why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastly looking?

GONZALO, [to Sebastian]  What's the matter?

SEBASTIAN
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
Like bulls, or rather lions. Did 't not wake you?
It struck mine ear most terribly.

ALONSO  I heard nothing.

ANTONIO
O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
To make an earthquake. Sure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.

ALONSO  Heard you this, Gonzalo?

GONZALO
Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming,
And that a strange one too, which did awake me.
I shaked you, sir, and cried. As mine eyes opened,
I saw their weapons drawn. There was a noise,
That's verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
Or that we quit this place. Let's draw our weapons.

ALONSO
Lead off this ground, and let's make further search
For my poor son.

GONZALO  Heavens keep him from these beasts,
For he is, sure, i' th' island.

ALONSO  Lead away.

ARIEL, [aside]
Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.
So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Caliban with a burden of wood. A noise of
thunder heard.]


CALIBAN
All the infections that the sun sucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him
By inchmeal a disease! His spirits hear me,
And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire,
Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark
Out of my way, unless he bid 'em. But
For every trifle are they set upon me,
Sometimes like apes, that mow and chatter at me
And after bite me; then like hedgehogs, which
Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount
Their pricks at my footfall. Sometime am I
All wound with adders, who with cloven tongues
Do hiss me into madness. Lo, now, lo!
Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat.
Perchance he will not mind me.
[He lies down and covers himself with a cloak.]

[Enter Trinculo.]


TRINCULO  Here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off
any weather at all. And another storm brewing; I
hear it sing i' th' wind. Yond same black cloud, yond
huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed
his liquor. If it should thunder as it did before, I
know not where to hide my head. Yond same cloud
cannot choose but fall by pailfuls. [Noticing Caliban.]
What have we here, a man or a fish? Dead or
alive? A fish, he smells like a fish--a very ancient
and fishlike smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-John.
A strange fish. Were I in England now, as once
I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday
fool there but would give a piece of silver. There
would this monster make a man. Any strange beast
there makes a man. When they will not give a doit to
relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a
dead Indian. Legged like a man, and his fins like
arms! Warm, o' my troth! I do now let loose my
opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an
islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.
[Thunder.] Alas, the storm is come again. My best
way is to creep under his gaberdine. There is no
other shelter hereabout. Misery acquaints a man
with strange bedfellows. I will here shroud till the
dregs of the storm be past.
[He crawls under Caliban's cloak.]

[Enter Stephano singing.]


STEPHANO
	I shall no more to sea, to sea.
	Here shall I die ashore--
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral.
Well, here's my comfort.	[Drinks.]
[Sings.]

	The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,
	   The gunner and his mate,
	Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,
	   But none of us cared for Kate.
	      For she had a tongue with a tang,
	      Would cry to a sailor "Go hang!"
	She loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch,
	Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch.
	      Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!
This is a scurvy tune too. But here's my comfort.
[Drinks.]

CALIBAN  Do not torment me! O!

STEPHANO  What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do
you put tricks upon 's with savages and men of Ind?
Ha? I have not scaped drowning to be afeard now
of your four legs, for it hath been said "As proper a
man as ever went on four legs cannot make him
give ground," and it shall be said so again while
Stephano breathes at' nostrils.

CALIBAN  The spirit torments me. O!

STEPHANO  This is some monster of the isle with four
legs, who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the
devil should he learn our language? I will give him
some relief, if it be but for that. If I can recover him
and keep him tame and get to Naples with him,
he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on
neat's leather.

CALIBAN  Do not torment me, prithee. I'll bring my
wood home faster.

STEPHANO  He's in his fit now, and does not talk after
the wisest. He shall taste of my bottle. If he have
never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove
his fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will
not take too much for him. He shall pay for him that
hath him, and that soundly.

CALIBAN  Thou dost me yet but little hurt. Thou wilt
anon; I know it by thy trembling. Now Prosper
works upon thee.

STEPHANO  Come on your ways. Open your mouth.
Here is that which will give language to you, cat.
Open your mouth. This will shake your shaking, I
can tell you, and that soundly. [Caliban drinks.] You
cannot tell who's your friend. Open your chaps
again.

TRINCULO  I should know that voice. It should be--but
he is drowned, and these are devils. O, defend me!

STEPHANO  Four legs and two voices--a most delicate
monster! His forward voice now is to speak well of
his friend. His backward voice is to utter foul
speeches and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle
will recover him, I will help his ague. Come.
[Caliban drinks.] Amen! I will pour some in thy
other mouth.

TRINCULO  Stephano!

STEPHANO  Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy,
this is a devil, and no monster! I will leave him; I
have no long spoon.

TRINCULO  Stephano! If thou be'st Stephano, touch me
and speak to me, for I am Trinculo--be not
afeard--thy good friend Trinculo.

STEPHANO  If thou be'st Trinculo, come forth. I'll pull
thee by the lesser legs. If any be Trinculo's legs,
these are they. [He pulls him out from under Caliban's
cloak.] Thou art very Trinculo indeed. How
cam'st thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? Can
he vent Trinculos?

TRINCULO  I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke.
But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I
hope now thou art not drowned. Is the storm
overblown? I hid me under the dead mooncalf's
gaberdine for fear of the storm. And art thou living,
Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans scaped!

STEPHANO  Prithee, do not turn me about. My stomach
is not constant.

CALIBAN, [aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not
sprites. That's a brave god and bears celestial liquor.
I will kneel to him.
[He crawls out from under the cloak.]

STEPHANO, [to Trinculo]  How didst thou scape? How
cam'st thou hither? Swear by this bottle how thou
cam'st hither--I escaped upon a butt of sack, which
the sailors heaved o'erboard--by this bottle, which
I made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands,
since I was cast ashore.

CALIBAN  I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true
subject, for the liquor is not earthly.

STEPHANO, [to Trinculo]  Here. Swear then how thou
escapedst.

TRINCULO  Swum ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim
like a duck, I'll be sworn.

STEPHANO  Here, kiss the book.	[Trinculo drinks.]
Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made
like a goose.

TRINCULO  O Stephano, hast any more of this?

STEPHANO  The whole butt, man. My cellar is in a rock
by th' seaside, where my wine is hid.--How now,
mooncalf, how does thine ague?

CALIBAN  Hast thou not dropped from heaven?

STEPHANO  Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee. I was the
man i' th' moon when time was.

CALIBAN  I have seen thee in her, and I do adore thee.
My mistress showed me thee, and thy dog, and thy
bush.

STEPHANO  Come, swear to that. Kiss the book. I will
furnish it anon with new contents. Swear.
[Caliban drinks.]

TRINCULO  By this good light, this is a very shallow
monster. I afeard of him? A very weak monster. The
man i' th' moon? A most poor, credulous monster!
--Well drawn, monster, in good sooth!

CALIBAN  I'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island,
and I will kiss thy foot. I prithee, be my god.

TRINCULO  By this light, a most perfidious and drunken
monster. When 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle.

CALIBAN  I'll kiss thy foot. I'll swear myself thy subject.

STEPHANO  Come on, then. Down, and swear.
[Caliban kneels.]

TRINCULO  I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed
monster. A most scurvy monster. I could
find in my heart to beat him--

STEPHANO  Come, kiss.

TRINCULO  --but that the poor monster's in drink. An
abominable monster.

CALIBAN
I'll show thee the best springs. I'll pluck thee berries.
I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough.
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve.
I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
Thou wondrous man.

TRINCULO  A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder
of a poor drunkard.

CALIBAN, [standing]
I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow,
And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts,
Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
To snare the nimble marmoset. I'll bring thee
To clustering filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?

STEPHANO  I prithee now, lead the way without any
more talking.--Trinculo, the King and all our
company else being drowned, we will inherit here.
--Here, bear my bottle.--Fellow Trinculo, we'll
fill him by and by again.

CALIBAN [sings drunkenly]
	Farewell, master, farewell, farewell.

TRINCULO  A howling monster, a drunken monster.

CALIBAN [sings]
	No more dams I'll make for fish,
	   Nor fetch in firing
	   At requiring,
	Nor scrape trenchering, nor wash dish.
	   'Ban, 'ban, Ca-caliban
	   Has a new master. Get a new man.
Freedom, high-day! High-day, freedom! Freedom,
high-day, freedom!

STEPHANO  O brave monster! Lead the way.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Ferdinand bearing a log.]


FERDINAND
There be some sports are painful, and their labor
Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead
And makes my labors pleasures. O, she is
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, and says such
baseness
Had never like executor. I forget;
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors,
Most busiest when I do it.

[Enter Miranda; and Prospero at a distance, unobserved.]


MIRANDA  Alas now, pray you,
Work not so hard. I would the lightning had
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile.
Pray, set it down and rest you. When this burns
'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself.
He's safe for these three hours.

FERDINAND  O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.

MIRANDA  If you'll sit down,
I'll bear your logs the while. Pray, give me that.
I'll carry it to the pile.

FERDINAND  No, precious creature,
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonor undergo
While I sit lazy by.

MIRANDA  It would become me
As well as it does you, and I should do it
With much more ease, for my good will is to it,
And yours it is against.

PROSPERO, [aside]  Poor worm, thou art infected.
This visitation shows it.

MIRANDA  You look wearily.
FERDINAND
No, noble mistress, 'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you,
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,
What is your name?

MIRANDA  Miranda.--O my father,
I have broke your hest to say so!

FERDINAND  Admired Miranda!
Indeed the top of admiration, worth
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have eyed with best regard, and many a time
Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues
Have I liked several women, never any
With so full soul but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
And put it to the foil. But you, O you,
So perfect and so peerless, are created
Of every creature's best.

MIRANDA  I do not know
One of my sex, no woman's face remember,
Save, from my glass, mine own. Nor have I seen
More that I may call men than you, good friend,
And my dear father. How features are abroad
I am skilless of, but by my modesty,
The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
Any companion in the world but you,
Nor can imagination form a shape
Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle
Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
I therein do forget.

FERDINAND  I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I do think a king--
I would, not so!--and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
The very instant that I saw you did
My heart fly to your service, there resides
To make me slave to it, and for your sake
Am I this patient log-man.

MIRANDA  Do you love me?

FERDINAND
O heaven, O Earth, bear witness to this sound,
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true; if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief. I,
Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world,
Do love, prize, honor you.

MIRANDA  I am a fool
To weep at what I am glad of.

PROSPERO, [aside]  Fair encounter
Of two most rare affections. Heavens rain grace
On that which breeds between 'em!

FERDINAND  Wherefore
weep you?

MIRANDA
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
What I desire to give, and much less take
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling,
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning,
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence.
I am your wife if you will marry me.
If not, I'll die your maid. To be your fellow
You may deny me, but I'll be your servant
Whether you will or no.

FERDINAND
My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.

MIRANDA
My husband, then?

FERDINAND  Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage e'er of freedom. Here's my hand.

MIRANDA, [clasping his hand]
And mine, with my heart in 't. And now farewell
Till half an hour hence.

FERDINAND  A thousand thousand.
[They exit.]

PROSPERO
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing
At nothing can be more. I'll to my book,
For yet ere suppertime must I perform
Much business appertaining.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo.]


STEPHANO, [to Trinculo]  Tell not me. When the butt is
out, we will drink water; not a drop before. Therefore
bear up and board 'em.--Servant monster,
drink to me.

TRINCULO  Servant monster? The folly of this island!
They say there's but five upon this isle; we are three
of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state
totters.

STEPHANO  Drink, servant monster, when I bid thee.
Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
[Caliban drinks.]

TRINCULO  Where should they be set else? He were a
brave monster indeed if they were set in his tail.

STEPHANO  My man-monster hath drowned his tongue
in sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me. I
swam, ere I could recover the shore, five-and-thirty
leagues off and on, by this light.--Thou shalt be my
lieutenant, monster, or my standard.

TRINCULO  Your lieutenant, if you list. He's no
standard.

STEPHANO  We'll not run, Monsieur Monster.

TRINCULO  Nor go neither. But you'll lie like dogs, and
yet say nothing neither.

STEPHANO  Mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou
be'st a good mooncalf.

CALIBAN  How does thy Honor? Let me lick thy shoe. I'll
not serve him; he is not valiant.

TRINCULO  Thou liest, most ignorant monster. I am in
case to justle a constable. Why, thou debauched
fish, thou! Was there ever man a coward that hath
drunk so much sack as I today? Wilt thou tell a
monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a
monster?

CALIBAN  Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my
lord?

TRINCULO  "Lord," quoth he? That a monster should be
such a natural!

CALIBAN  Lo, lo again! Bite him to death, I prithee.

STEPHANO  Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head.
If you prove a mutineer, the next tree. The poor
monster's my subject, and he shall not suffer
indignity.

CALIBAN  I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased
to harken once again to the suit I made to thee?

STEPHANO  Marry, will I. Kneel and repeat it. I will
stand, and so shall Trinculo.

[Enter Ariel, invisible.]


CALIBAN, [kneeling]  As I told thee before, I am subject
to a tyrant, a sorcerer, that by his cunning hath
cheated me of the island.

ARIEL, [in Trinculo's voice]  Thou liest.

CALIBAN, [to Trinculo]  Thou liest, thou jesting monkey,
thou. [He stands.] I would my valiant master would
destroy thee. I do not lie.

STEPHANO  Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in 's
tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your
teeth.

TRINCULO  Why, I said nothing.

STEPHANO  Mum then, and no more. [Trinculo stands
aside.] Proceed.

CALIBAN
I say by sorcery he got this isle;
From me he got it. If thy Greatness will,
Revenge it on him, for I know thou dar'st,
But this thing dare not.

STEPHANO  That's most certain.

CALIBAN
Thou shalt be lord of it, and I'll serve thee.

STEPHANO  How now shall this be compassed? Canst
thou bring me to the party?

CALIBAN
Yea, yea, my lord. I'll yield him thee asleep,
Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.

ARIEL, [in Trinculo's voice]  Thou liest. Thou canst not.

CALIBAN
What a pied ninny's this!--Thou scurvy patch!--
I do beseech thy Greatness, give him blows
And take his bottle from him. When that's gone,
He shall drink naught but brine, for I'll not show him
Where the quick freshes are.

STEPHANO  Trinculo, run into no further danger. Interrupt
the monster one word further, and by this
hand, I'll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a
stockfish of thee.

TRINCULO  Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go
farther off.

STEPHANO  Didst thou not say he lied?

ARIEL, [in Trinculo's voice]  Thou liest.

STEPHANO  Do I so? Take thou that.	[He beats Trinculo.]
As you like this, give me the lie another time.

TRINCULO  I did not give the lie! Out o' your wits and
hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and
drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the
devil take your fingers!

CALIBAN  Ha, ha, ha!

STEPHANO  Now forward with your tale. [To Trinculo.]
Prithee, stand further off.

CALIBAN
Beat him enough. After a little time
I'll beat him too.

STEPHANO  Stand farther. [Trinculo moves farther
away.] Come, proceed.

CALIBAN
Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
I' th' afternoon to sleep. There thou mayst brain him,
Having first seized his books, or with a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his weasand with thy knife. Remember
First to possess his books, for without them
He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
One spirit to command. They all do hate him
As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
He has brave utensils--for so he calls them--
Which, when he has a house, he'll deck withal.
And that most deeply to consider is
The beauty of his daughter. He himself
Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman
But only Sycorax my dam and she;
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
As great'st does least.

STEPHANO  Is it so brave a lass?

CALIBAN
Ay, lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant,
And bring thee forth brave brood.

STEPHANO  Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter
and I will be king and queen--save our Graces!--
and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys.--Dost
thou like the plot, Trinculo?

TRINCULO  Excellent.

STEPHANO  Give me thy hand. I am sorry I beat thee.
But while thou liv'st, keep a good tongue in thy
head.

CALIBAN
Within this half hour will he be asleep.
Wilt thou destroy him then?

STEPHANO  Ay, on mine honor.

ARIEL, [aside]  This will I tell my master.

CALIBAN
Thou mak'st me merry. I am full of pleasure.
Let us be jocund. Will you troll the catch
You taught me but whilere?

STEPHANO  At thy request, monster, I will do reason,
any reason.--Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.
[Sings.]
	Flout 'em and cout 'em
	And scout 'em and flout 'em!
	   Thought is free.

CALIBAN  That's not the tune.
[Ariel plays the tune on a tabor and pipe.]

STEPHANO  What is this same?

TRINCULO  This is the tune of our catch played by the
picture of Nobody.

STEPHANO, [to the invisible musician]  If thou be'st a
man, show thyself in thy likeness. If thou be'st a
devil, take 't as thou list.

TRINCULO  O, forgive me my sins!

STEPHANO  He that dies pays all debts.--I defy thee!--
Mercy upon us!

CALIBAN  Art thou afeard?

STEPHANO  No, monster, not I.

CALIBAN
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises,
Sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
Will hum about mine ears, and sometimes voices
That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
The clouds methought would open, and show riches
Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked
I cried to dream again.

STEPHANO  This will prove a brave kingdom to me,
where I shall have my music for nothing.

CALIBAN  When Prospero is destroyed.

STEPHANO  That shall be by and by. I remember the
story.

TRINCULO  The sound is going away. Let's follow it, and
after do our work.

STEPHANO  Lead, monster. We'll follow.--I would I
could see this taborer. He lays it on. Wilt come?

TRINCULO  I'll follow, Stephano.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, Gonzalo, Adrian,
Francisco, etc.]


GONZALO
By 'r lakin, I can go no further, sir.
My old bones aches. Here's a maze trod indeed
Through forthrights and meanders. By your
patience,
I needs must rest me.

ALONSO  Old lord, I cannot blame thee.
Who am myself attached with weariness
To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest.
Even here I will put off my hope and keep it
No longer for my flatterer. He is drowned
Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.

ANTONIO, [aside to Sebastian]
I am right glad that he's so out of hope.
Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
That you resolved t' effect.

SEBASTIAN, [aside to Antonio]  The next advantage
Will we take throughly.

ANTONIO, [aside to Sebastian]  Let it be tonight;
For now they are oppressed with travel, they
Will not nor cannot use such vigilance
As when they are fresh.

SEBASTIAN, [aside to Antonio]  I say tonight. No more.

[Solemn and strange music, and enter Prospero on the
top invisible.]


ALONSO
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark.

GONZALO  Marvelous sweet music!

[Enter several strange shapes, bringing in a banquet, and
dance about it with gentle actions of salutations.]


ALONSO
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?

SEBASTIAN
A living drollery! Now I will believe
That there are unicorns, that in Arabia
There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix
At this hour reigning there.

ANTONIO  I'll believe both;
And what does else want credit, come to me
And I'll be sworn 'tis true. Travelers ne'er did lie,
Though fools at home condemn 'em.

GONZALO  If in Naples
I should report this now, would they believe me?
If I should say I saw such islanders--
For, certes, these are people of the island--
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note
Their manners are more gentle, kind, than of
Our human generation you shall find
Many, nay, almost any.

PROSPERO, [aside]  Honest lord,
Thou hast said well, for some of you there present
Are worse than devils.

ALONSO  I cannot too much muse
Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound,
expressing--
Although they want the use of tongue--a kind
Of excellent dumb discourse.

PROSPERO, [aside]  Praise in departing.
[Inviting the King, etc., to eat, the shapes depart.]

FRANCISCO  They vanished strangely.

SEBASTIAN  No matter, since
They have left their viands behind, for we have
stomachs.
Will 't please you taste of what is here?

ALONSO  Not I.

GONZALO
Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,
Who would believe that there were mountaineers
Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at
'em
Wallets of flesh? Or that there were such men
Whose heads stood in their breasts? Which now we
find
Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
Good warrant of.

ALONSO  I will stand to and feed.
Although my last, no matter, since I feel
The best is past. Brother, my lord the Duke,
Stand to, and do as we.
[Alonso, Sebastian, and Antonio
move toward the table.]

[Thunder and lightning. Enter Ariel, like a Harpy, claps
his wings upon the table, and with a quaint device the
banquet vanishes.]


ARIEL [as Harpy]
You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,
That hath to instrument this lower world
And what is in 't, the never-surfeited sea
Hath caused to belch up you, and on this island,
Where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men
Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;
And even with such-like valor, men hang and drown
Their proper selves.
[Alonso, Sebastian, and Antonio draw their swords.]
You fools, I and my fellows
Are ministers of Fate. The elements
Of whom your swords are tempered may as well
Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs
Kill the still-closing waters as diminish
One dowl that's in my plume. My fellow ministers
Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,
Your swords are now too massy for your strengths
And will not be uplifted. But remember--
For that's my business to you--that you three
From Milan did supplant good Prospero,
Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,
Him and his innocent child, for which foul deed,
The powers--delaying, not forgetting--have
Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures
Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,
They have bereft; and do pronounce by me
Ling'ring perdition, worse than any death
Can be at once, shall step by step attend
You and your ways, whose wraths to guard you
from--
Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
Upon your heads--is nothing but heart's sorrow
And a clear life ensuing.	[He vanishes in thunder.]

[Then, to soft music, enter the shapes again, and dance,
with mocks and mows, and carrying out the table.]



PROSPERO, [aside]
Bravely the figure of this Harpy hast thou
Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring.
Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated
In what thou hadst to say. So, with good life
And observation strange, my meaner ministers
Their several kinds have done. My high charms
work,
And these mine enemies are all knit up
In their distractions. They now are in my power;
And in these fits I leave them while I visit
Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned,
And his and mine loved darling.	[He exits, above.]

GONZALO, [to Alonso]
I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you
In this strange stare?

ALONSO  O, it is monstrous, monstrous!
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it;
The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,
That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced
The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass.
Therefor my son i' th' ooze is bedded, and
I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded,
And with him there lie mudded.	[He exits.]

SEBASTIAN  But one fiend at a time,
I'll fight their legions o'er.

ANTONIO  I'll be thy second.
[They exit.]

GONZALO
All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt,
Like poison given to work a great time after,
Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you
That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly
And hinder them from what this ecstasy
May now provoke them to.

ADRIAN  Follow, I pray you.
[They all exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Prospero, Ferdinand, and Miranda.]


PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]
If I have too austerely punished you,
Your compensation makes amends, for I
Have given you here a third of mine own life,
Or that for which I live; who once again
I tender to thy hand. All thy vexations
Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
Hast strangely stood the test. Here afore heaven
I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand,
Do not smile at me that I boast of her,
For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
And make it halt behind her.

FERDINAND  I do believe it
Against an oracle.

PROSPERO
Then, as my gift and thine own acquisition
Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But
If thou dost break her virgin-knot before
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
With full and holy rite be ministered,
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
To make this contract grow; but barren hate,
Sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly
That you shall hate it both. Therefore take heed,
As Hymen's lamps shall light you.

FERDINAND  As I hope
For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion
Our worser genius can shall never melt
Mine honor into lust to take away
The edge of that day's celebration
When I shall think or Phoebus' steeds are foundered
Or night kept chained below.

PROSPERO  Fairly spoke.
Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.
[Ferdinand and Miranda move aside.]
What, Ariel, my industrious servant, Ariel!

[Enter Ariel.]


ARIEL
What would my potent master? Here I am.

PROSPERO
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
Did worthily perform, and I must use you
In such another trick. Go bring the rabble,
O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place.
Incite them to quick motion, for I must
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise,
And they expect it from me.

ARIEL  Presently?

PROSPERO  Ay, with a twink.

ARIEL
	Before you can say "Come" and "Go,"
	And breathe twice, and cry "So, so,"
	Each one, tripping on his toe,
	Will be here with mop and mow.
	Do you love me, master? No?

PROSPERO
Dearly, my delicate Ariel. Do not approach
Till thou dost hear me call.

ARIEL  Well; I conceive.
[He exits.]

PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]
Look thou be true; do not give dalliance
Too much the rein. The strongest oaths are straw
To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious,
Or else goodnight your vow.

FERDINAND  I warrant you, sir,
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Abates the ardor of my liver.

PROSPERO  Well.--
Now come, my Ariel. Bring a corollary
Rather than want a spirit. Appear, and pertly.
[Soft music.]
No tongue. All eyes. Be silent.

[Enter Iris.]


IRIS
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas
Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas;
Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep;
Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims,
Which spongy April at thy hest betrims
To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy
broom groves,
Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves,
Being lass-lorn; thy poll-clipped vineyard,
And thy sea marge, sterile and rocky hard,
Where thou thyself dost air--the Queen o' th' sky,
Whose wat'ry arch and messenger am I,
Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,
Here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.

[Enter Ceres.]


CERES
Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er
Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;
Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers
Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers;
And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown
My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down,
Rich scarf to my proud Earth. Why hath thy queen
Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?

IRIS
A contract of true love to celebrate,
And some donation freely to estate
On the blest lovers.

CERES  Tell me, heavenly bow,
If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,
Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot
The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,
Her and her blind boy's scandaled company
I have forsworn.

IRIS  Of her society
Be not afraid. I met her deity
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son
Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have
done
Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,
Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid
Till Hymen's torch be lighted--but in vain.
Mars's hot minion is returned again;
Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,
Swears he will shoot no more, but play with
sparrows,
And be a boy right out.

[Juno descends.]


CERES  Highest queen of state,
Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.

JUNO
How does my bounteous sister? Go with me
To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be
And honored in their issue.
[They sing.]

JUNO
	Honor, riches, marriage-blessing,
	Long continuance and increasing,
	Hourly joys be still upon you.
	Juno sings her blessings on you.

CERES
	Earth's increase, foison plenty,
	Barns and garners never empty,
	Vines with clust'ring bunches growing,
	Plants with goodly burden bowing;
	Spring come to you at the farthest
	In the very end of harvest.
	Scarcity and want shall shun you.
	Ceres' blessing so is on you.

FERDINAND
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold
To think these spirits?

PROSPERO  Spirits, which by mine art
I have from their confines called to enact
My present fancies.

FERDINAND  Let me live here ever.
So rare a wondered father and a wise
Makes this place paradise.
[Juno and Ceres whisper,
and send Iris on employment.]

PROSPERO  Sweet now, silence.
Juno and Ceres whisper seriously.
There's something else to do. Hush, and be mute,
Or else our spell is marred.

IRIS
You nymphs, called naiads of the windring brooks,
With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,
Leave your crisp channels and on this green land
Answer your summons, Juno does command.
Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
A contract of true love. Be not too late.

[Enter certain Nymphs.]

You sunburned sicklemen, of August weary,
Come hither from the furrow and be merry.
Make holiday: your rye-straw hats put on,
And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
In country footing.

[Enter certain Reapers, properly habited. They join with
the Nymphs in a graceful dance, towards the end
whereof Prospero starts suddenly and speaks.]


PROSPERO
I had forgot that foul conspiracy
Of the beast Caliban and his confederates
Against my life. The minute of their plot
Is almost come.--Well done. Avoid. No more.
[To a strange, hollow, and confused noise,
the spirits heavily vanish.]

FERDINAND, [to Miranda]
This is strange. Your father's in some passion
That works him strongly.

MIRANDA  Never till this day
Saw I him touched with anger, so distempered.

PROSPERO, [to Ferdinand]
You do look, my son, in a moved sort,
As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir.
Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and
Are melted into air, into thin air;
And like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed.
Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled.
Be not disturbed with my infirmity.
If you be pleased, retire into my cell
And there repose. A turn or two I'll walk
To still my beating mind.

FERDINAND/MIRANDA  We wish your peace.
[They exit.]

[Enter Ariel.]


PROSPERO
Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.

ARIEL
Thy thoughts I cleave to. What's thy pleasure?

PROSPERO  Spirit,
We must prepare to meet with Caliban.

ARIEL
Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,
I thought to have told thee of it, but I feared
Lest I might anger thee.

PROSPERO
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?

ARIEL
I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking,
So full of valor that they smote the air
For breathing in their faces, beat the ground
For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,
At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their
ears,
Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses
As they smelt music. So I charmed their ears
That, calf-like, they my lowing followed through
Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and
thorns,
Which entered their frail shins. At last I left them
I' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell,
There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake
O'erstunk their feet.

PROSPERO  This was well done, my bird.
Thy shape invisible retain thou still.
The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither
For stale to catch these thieves.

ARIEL  I go, I go.	[He exits.]

PROSPERO
A devil, a born devil, on whose nature
Nurture can never stick; on whom my pains,
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost;
And as with age his body uglier grows,
So his mind cankers. I will plague them all
Even to roaring.

[Enter Ariel, loaden with glistering apparel, etc.]

Come, hang them on this line.

[Enter Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo, all wet, as
Prospero and Ariel look on.]


CALIBAN  Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole
may not hear a footfall. We now are near his cell.

STEPHANO  Monster, your fairy, which you say is a
harmless fairy, has done little better than played the
jack with us.

TRINCULO  Monster, I do smell all horse piss, at which
my nose is in great indignation.

STEPHANO  So is mine.--Do you hear, monster. If I
should take a displeasure against you, look you--

TRINCULO  Thou wert but a lost monster.

CALIBAN
Good my lord, give me thy favor still.
Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
Shall hoodwink this mischance. Therefore speak
softly.
All's hushed as midnight yet.

TRINCULO  Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool!

STEPHANO  There is not only disgrace and dishonor in
that, monster, but an infinite loss.

TRINCULO  That's more to me than my wetting. Yet this
is your harmless fairy, monster!

STEPHANO  I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er
ears for my labor.

CALIBAN
Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,
This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter.
Do that good mischief which may make this island
Thine own forever, and I, thy Caliban,
For aye thy foot-licker.

STEPHANO  Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody
thoughts.

TRINCULO, [seeing the apparel]  O King Stephano, O
peer, O worthy Stephano, look what a wardrobe
here is for thee!

CALIBAN
Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.

TRINCULO  Oho, monster, we know what belongs to a
frippery. [He puts on one of the gowns.] O King
Stephano!

STEPHANO  Put off that gown, Trinculo. By this hand,
I'll have that gown.

TRINCULO  Thy Grace shall have it.

CALIBAN
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean
To dote thus on such luggage? Let 't alone,
And do the murder first. If he awake,
From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches,
Make us strange stuff.

STEPHANO  Be you quiet, monster.--Mistress Line, is
not this my jerkin?	[He takes a jacket from the tree.]
Now is the jerkin under the line.--Now, jerkin, you
are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.

TRINCULO  Do, do. We steal by line and level, an 't like
your Grace.

STEPHANO  I thank thee for that jest. Here's a garment
for 't. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king
of this country. "Steal by line and level" is an excellent
pass of pate. There's another garment for 't.

TRINCULO  Monster, come, put some lime upon your
fingers, and away with the rest.

CALIBAN
I will have none on 't. We shall lose our time
And all be turned to barnacles or to apes
With foreheads villainous low.

STEPHANO  Monster, lay to your fingers. Help to bear
this away where my hogshead of wine is, or I'll turn
you out of my kingdom. Go to, carry this.

TRINCULO  And this.

STEPHANO  Ay, and this.
[A noise of hunters heard.]

[Enter divers spirits in shape of dogs and hounds,
hunting them about, Prospero and Ariel setting them on.]


PROSPERO  Hey, Mountain, hey!

ARIEL  Silver! There it goes, Silver!

PROSPERO
Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there! Hark, hark!
[Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo are driven off.]
Go, charge my goblins that they grind their joints
With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
With aged cramps, and more pinch-spotted make
them
Than pard or cat o' mountain.

ARIEL  Hark, they roar.

PROSPERO
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
Lies at my mercy all mine enemies.
Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou
Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little
Follow and do me service.
[They exit.]



ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Prospero in his magic robes, and Ariel.]


PROSPERO
Now does my project gather to a head.
My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time
Goes upright with his carriage.--How's the day?

ARIEL
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,
You said our work should cease.

PROSPERO  I did say so
When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit,
How fares the King and 's followers?

ARIEL  Confined
together
In the same fashion as you gave in charge,
Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,
In the line grove which weather-fends your cell.
They cannot budge till your release. The King,
His brother, and yours abide all three distracted,
And the remainder mourning over them,
Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly
Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord
Gonzalo.
His tears runs down his beard like winter's drops
From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works
'em
That if you now beheld them, your affections
Would become tender.

PROSPERO  Dost thou think so, spirit?

ARIEL
Mine would, sir, were I human.

PROSPERO  And mine shall.
Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
One of their kind, that relish all as sharply
Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?
Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th'
quick,
Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
Do I take part. The rarer action is
In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
Not a frown further. Go, release them, Ariel.
My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
And they shall be themselves.

ARIEL  I'll fetch them, sir.
[He exits.]

[Prospero draws a large circle on the stage with his staff.]


PROSPERO
You elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves,
And you that on the sands with printless foot
Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him
When he comes back; you demi-puppets that
By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,
Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime
Is to make midnight mushrumps, that rejoice
To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,
Weak masters though you be, I have bedimmed
The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds,
And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault
Set roaring war; to the dread rattling thunder
Have I given fire, and rifted Jove's stout oak
With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory
Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up
The pine and cedar; graves at my command
Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth
By my so potent art. But this rough magic
I here abjure, and when I have required
Some heavenly music, which even now I do,
[Prospero gestures with his staff.]
To work mine end upon their senses that
This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff,
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
And deeper than did ever plummet sound
I'll drown my book.	[Solemn music.]

[Here enters Ariel before; then Alonso with a frantic
gesture, attended by Gonzalo; Sebastian and Antonio in
like manner attended by Adrian and Francisco. They all
enter the circle which Prospero had made, and there
stand charmed; which Prospero observing, speaks.]

A solemn air, and the best comforter
To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains,
Now useless, boiled within thy skull. There stand,
For you are spell-stopped.--
Holy Gonzalo, honorable man,
Mine eyes, e'en sociable to the show of thine,
Fall fellowly drops.--The charm dissolves apace,
And as the morning steals upon the night,
Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
Their clearer reason.--O good Gonzalo,
My true preserver and a loyal sir
To him thou follow'st, I will pay thy graces
Home, both in word and deed.--Most cruelly
Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter.
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.--
Thou art pinched for 't now, Sebastian.--Flesh and
blood,
You, brother mine, that entertained ambition,
Expelled remorse and nature, whom, with Sebastian,
Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,
Would here have killed your king, I do forgive thee,
Unnatural though thou art.--Their understanding
Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
That yet looks on me or would know me.--Ariel,
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell.
[Ariel exits and at once returns
with Prospero's ducal robes.]
I will discase me and myself present
As I was sometime Milan.--Quickly, spirit,
Thou shalt ere long be free.

ARIEL [sings, and helps to attire him.]

	   Where the bee sucks, there suck I.
	   In a cowslip's bell I lie.
	   There I couch when owls do cry.
	   On the bat's back I do fly
	   After summer merrily.
	Merrily, merrily shall I live now
	Under the blossom that hangs on the bow.


PROSPERO
Why, that's my dainty Ariel. I shall miss
Thee, but yet thou shalt have freedom. So, so, so.
To the King's ship, invisible as thou art.
There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
Under the hatches. The master and the boatswain
Being awake, enforce them to this place,
And presently, I prithee.

ARIEL
I drink the air before me, and return
Or ere your pulse twice beat.	[He exits.]

GONZALO
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
Inhabits here. Some heavenly power guide us
Out of this fearful country!

PROSPERO, [to Alonso]  Behold, sir king,
The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero.
For more assurance that a living prince
Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body,
[He embraces Alonso.]
And to thee and thy company I bid
A hearty welcome.

ALONSO  Whe'er thou be'st he or no,
Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me
(As late I have been) I not know. Thy pulse
Beats as of flesh and blood; and since I saw thee,
Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which
I fear a madness held me. This must crave,
An if this be at all, a most strange story.
Thy dukedom I resign, and do entreat
Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should
Prospero
Be living and be here?

PROSPERO, [to Gonzalo]  First, noble friend,
Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot
Be measured or confined.

GONZALO  Whether this be
Or be not, I'll not swear.

PROSPERO  You do yet taste
Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you
Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all.
[Aside to Sebastian and Antonio.] But you, my brace
of lords, were I so minded,
I here could pluck his Highness' frown upon you
And justify you traitors. At this time
I will tell no tales.

SEBASTIAN, [aside]  The devil speaks in him.

PROSPERO, [aside to Sebastian]  No.
[To Antonio.] For you, most wicked sir, whom to
call brother
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
Thy rankest fault, all of them, and require
My dukedom of thee, which perforce I know
Thou must restore.

ALONSO  If thou be'st Prospero,
Give us particulars of thy preservation,
How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since
Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost--
How sharp the point of this remembrance is!--
My dear son Ferdinand.

PROSPERO  I am woe for 't, sir.

ALONSO
Irreparable is the loss, and patience
Says it is past her cure.

PROSPERO  I rather think
You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace,
For the like loss, I have her sovereign aid
And rest myself content.

ALONSO  You the like loss?

PROSPERO
As great to me as late, and supportable
To make the dear loss have I means much weaker
Than you may call to comfort you, for I
Have lost my daughter.

ALONSO  A daughter?
O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,
The King and Queen there! That they were, I wish
Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
Where my son lies!--When did you lose your
daughter?

PROSPERO
In this last tempest. I perceive these lords
At this encounter do so much admire
That they devour their reason, and scarce think
Their eyes do offices of truth, their words
Are natural breath.--But howsoe'er you have
Been justled from your senses, know for certain
That I am Prospero and that very duke
Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most
strangely
Upon this shore, where you were wracked, was
landed
To be the lord on 't. No more yet of this.
For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
Not a relation for a breakfast, nor
Befitting this first meeting. [To Alonso.] Welcome, sir.
This cell's my court. Here have I few attendants,
And subjects none abroad. Pray you, look in.
My dukedom since you have given me again,
I will requite you with as good a thing,
At least bring forth a wonder to content you
As much as me my dukedom.
[Here Prospero discovers Ferdinand and Miranda,
playing at chess.]

MIRANDA, [to Ferdinand]
Sweet lord, you play me false.

FERDINAND  No, my dearest love,
I would not for the world.

MIRANDA
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,
And I would call it fair play.

ALONSO  If this prove
A vision of the island, one dear son
Shall I twice lose.

SEBASTIAN  A most high miracle!

FERDINAND, [seeing Alonso and coming forward]
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.
I have cursed them without cause.	[He kneels.]

ALONSO  Now, all the
blessings
Of a glad father compass thee about!
Arise, and say how thou cam'st here.
[Ferdinand stands.]

MIRANDA, [rising and coming forward]  O wonder!
How many goodly creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is! O, brave new world
That has such people in 't!

PROSPERO  'Tis new to thee.

ALONSO, [to Ferdinand]
What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours.
Is she the goddess that hath severed us
And brought us thus together?

FERDINAND  Sir, she is mortal,
But by immortal providence she's mine.
I chose her when I could not ask my father
For his advice, nor thought I had one. She
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
Of whom so often I have heard renown,
But never saw before, of whom I have
Received a second life; and second father
This lady makes him to me.

ALONSO  I am hers.
But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
Must ask my child forgiveness!

PROSPERO  There, sir, stop.
Let us not burden our remembrances with
A heaviness that's gone.

GONZALO  I have inly wept
Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you
gods,
And on this couple drop a blessed crown,
For it is you that have chalked forth the way
Which brought us hither.

ALONSO  I say "Amen," Gonzalo.

GONZALO
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice
Beyond a common joy, and set it down
With gold on lasting pillars: in one voyage
Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis,
And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
Where he himself was lost; Prospero his dukedom
In a poor isle; and all of us ourselves
When no man was his own.

ALONSO, [to Ferdinand and Miranda]  Give me your
hands.
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
That doth not wish you joy!

GONZALO  Be it so. Amen.

[Enter Ariel, with the Master and Boatswain
amazedly following.]

O, look, sir, look, sir, here is more of us.
I prophesied if a gallows were on land,
This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,
That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on
shore?
Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?

BOATSWAIN
The best news is that we have safely found
Our king and company. The next: our ship,
Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split,
Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when
We first put out to sea.

ARIEL, [aside to Prospero]  Sir, all this service
Have I done since I went.

PROSPERO, [aside to Ariel]  My tricksy spirit!

ALONSO
These are not natural events. They strengthen
From strange to stranger.--Say, how came you
hither?

BOATSWAIN
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
I'd strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep
And--how, we know not--all clapped under
hatches,
Where, but even now, with strange and several
noises
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,
We were awaked, straightway at liberty,
Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
Our royal, good, and gallant ship, our master
Cap'ring to eye her. On a trice, so please you,
Even in a dream were we divided from them
And were brought moping hither.

ARIEL, [aside to Prospero]  Was 't well done?

PROSPERO, [aside to Ariel]
Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.

ALONSO
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod,
And there is in this business more than nature
Was ever conduct of. Some oracle
Must rectify our knowledge.

PROSPERO  Sir, my liege,
Do not infest your mind with beating on
The strangeness of this business. At picked leisure,
Which shall be shortly, single I'll resolve you,
Which to you shall seem probable, of every
These happened accidents; till when, be cheerful
And think of each thing well. [Aside to Ariel.]
Come hither, spirit;
Set Caliban and his companions free.
Untie the spell. [Ariel exits.] How fares my gracious
sir?
There are yet missing of your company
Some few odd lads that you remember not.

[Enter Ariel, driving in Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo
in their stolen apparel.]


STEPHANO  Every man shift for all the rest, and let no
man take care for himself, for all is but fortune.
Coraggio, bully monster, coraggio.

TRINCULO  If these be true spies which I wear in my
head, here's a goodly sight.

CALIBAN  O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! How
fine my master is! I am afraid he will chastise me.

SEBASTIAN  Ha, ha!
What things are these, my Lord Antonio?
Will money buy 'em?

ANTONIO  Very like. One of them
Is a plain fish and no doubt marketable.

PROSPERO
Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,
Then say if they be true. This misshapen knave,
His mother was a witch, and one so strong
That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
And deal in her command without her power.
These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil,
For he's a bastard one, had plotted with them
To take my life. Two of these fellows you
Must know and own. This thing of darkness I
Acknowledge mine.

CALIBAN  I shall be pinched to death.

ALONSO
Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?

SEBASTIAN  He is drunk now. Where had he wine?

ALONSO
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they
Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
[To Trinculo.] How cam'st thou in this pickle?

TRINCULO  I have been in such a pickle since I saw you
last that I fear me will never out of my bones. I
shall not fear flyblowing.

SEBASTIAN  Why, how now, Stephano?

STEPHANO  O, touch me not! I am not Stephano, but a
cramp.

PROSPERO  You'd be king o' the isle, sirrah?

STEPHANO  I should have been a sore one, then.

ALONSO, [indicating Caliban]
This is as strange a thing as e'er I looked on.

PROSPERO
He is as disproportioned in his manners
As in his shape. [To Caliban.] Go, sirrah, to my cell.
Take with you your companions. As you look
To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.

CALIBAN
Ay, that I will, and I'll be wise hereafter
And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass
Was I to take this drunkard for a god,
And worship this dull fool!

PROSPERO  Go to, away!

ALONSO, [to Stephano and Trinculo]
Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.

SEBASTIAN  Or stole it, rather.
[Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo exit.]

PROSPERO
Sir, I invite your Highness and your train
To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest
For this one night, which part of it I'll waste
With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it
Go quick away: the story of my life
And the particular accidents gone by
Since I came to this isle. And in the morn
I'll bring you to your ship, and so to Naples,
Where I have hope to see the nuptial
Of these our dear-beloved solemnized,
And thence retire me to my Milan, where
Every third thought shall be my grave.

ALONSO  I long
To hear the story of your life, which must
Take the ear strangely.

PROSPERO  I'll deliver all,
And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales,
And sail so expeditious that shall catch
Your royal fleet far off. [Aside to Ariel.] My Ariel,
chick,
That is thy charge. Then to the elements
Be free, and fare thou well.--Please you, draw near.
[They all exit.]

EPILOGUE,
[spoken by Prospero.]
============================


Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
And what strength I have 's mine own,
Which is most faint. Now 'tis true
I must be here confined by you,
Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
Since I have my dukedom got
And pardoned the deceiver, dwell
In this bare island by your spell,
But release me from my bands
With the help of your good hands.
Gentle breath of yours my sails
Must fill, or else my project fails,
Which was to please. Now I want
Spirits to enforce, art to enchant,
And my ending is despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayer,
Which pierces so that it assaults
Mercy itself, and frees all faults.
   As you from crimes would pardoned be,
   Let your indulgence set me free.
[He exits.]
